Subsurface 1.2

User Manual

Version 0.0.2

Autor documentation: Jacco van Koll


Scope of this document is the usage of the program.
Please read the build manual for instructions how to build the
software and (if needed) itÂ´s dependencies.


Audience: Fun Divers, Tec Divers, Professional Divers


1. Introduction:

Subsurface was started because of a lack of viable dive log software
on Linux. It turns out that the resulting software was easily ported
to Windows and Mac, but it clearly is a native Linux program first.
Right now, the program is under development and from version 1.1 it is
already very usable for divers with supported dive-computers.

In this manual the Suunto Viper will be used for all examples.

2. Requirements

Before you are able to import information from your divecomputer into
Subsurface, you need some preparation. Do you have the following:

	1. Your Divecomputer - Compatible with libdivecomputer (see list in Appendix A)
	2. Communication interface - Cable to connect your divecomputer to your PC/Laptop/Netbook
	3. Working installation of Subsurface
	4. If needed, the manual of your divecomputer


3. Start using the program:

When you start the program for the first time, it shows no information
at all. This is because the program does not automatically load the
already available dive-log files.

There is a menu, containing 'File', 'Log', 'Filter' and Help.

The screen is devided in 3 area's:

	Area with 3 tabs: Dive Notes, Equipment, Info & Stats
	Area next to the 3 tabs, which will contain the dive profile
	Area with the dives (usually called dive list), which can be sorted by number, date, etc.


4. Import new dives

Before you start fiddeling around with your divecomputer, note that
there are divecomputers that consume more power when they are in the
PC-Communication mode. This could drain your battery. Therefor, ensure
if your computer is recharging when connecting to the USB port. The
Suunto Viper does not recharge trough the USB connection. Please
consult the manual of your divecomputer if you are unsure if it will
be recharged when connected to the USB port.

Now it is time to hook up your divecomputer to your Linux system:

    Connect your interface cable to your divecomputer
    Connect your interface cable to a free USB port
    Put your divecomputer into PC Communication mode. (For Suunto Viper, press Mode - 1 Memory - 3 TR-PC)
	(You should consult the manual of your specific divecomputer for your brand and type)
    Go in Subsurface to 'File - Import'
	Within the popup, under Dive computer, choose your brand and type. Here we choose Suunto Vyper.
	Change the devicename under which your interface is connected. Default is /dev/ttyUSB0
	Click the 'OK' button.

    Now watch how your data is retrieved from your divecomputer!
    Depending on your type of computer and/or number of dives, this
    could take some time. Please be patient.


5. Viewing and completing your logs

When all data from your divecomputer is transferred, you will see a
listing of your dives in Area 3.

An example:

On Sunday Oct 23, 2011 you made a dive. In the log line of this dive, you see the following information:

    #: 		12				Dive number
    Date:	Sun, Oct 23, 2011 10:50		Date and time of your dive
    *:						Your rating (none at this time)
    m:		12.8				Your maximum depth in meters
    min:	31:20				Your dive-time in minutes and seconds
    Deg. C:	13.0				Lowest water temperature during your dive
    Cyl:					Your used cylinder (none at this time)
    O2%:	air				What type of mixture
    SAC:					SAC (none at this time)
    Location:					Where you performed your dive (empty)

    As you can see, some information is already there because it is
    retrieved from your divecomputer. Some information is waiting for
    you to be added. By double clicking on this dive, you can view and
    complete the log.


6. Edit the dive info



7. Edit equipment info


8. Setting up preferences

Subsurface has the ability to modify the preferences you want. By
using menu 'File - Preferences' you will be presented a popup with the
'Units'. You are free to choose what is your preference, with other
words, use Metric or Imperial.

You can set the following options:
	Depth:		Your diving depth in Meters or Feet
	Pressure:	The pressure of your tank(s) in Bar/Ato or PSI (Pressure Square Inch)
	Volume:		The volume of your tank(s) in Liter or CuFt (Cubic Feet) (At sea-level pressure)
	Temperature:	The temperature of the water in Celcius or Fahrenheit

In the main screen, you did see in Area 3, some information. In the Columns options, you can enable/disable options you  would like to show there:
	Show Temp:	Shows the temperature of your dive
	Show Cyl:	Shows the cylinder(s) of your dive
	Show O2%:	Shows the 02% of your dive
	Show SAC:	Shows the SAC of your dive (Surface Air Consumption)
	Show OTU:	Shows the OTU of your dive (Oxygen Toxicity Units)

And, you can change the font usage of the program.

I will give an example here:

I am a diver in The Netherlands, using the Metric System. Therefor, I
go to the menu File, choose Preferences here. In the Units section, I
use the folowing:

	Depth:		Meter
	Pressure:	Bar
	Volume:		Liter
	Temperature:	Celcius

I would like to see the:
			Temperature
			Show Cyl
			Show O2%
			Show SAC

As a beginning diver, I don't need to track my OTUs. So I leave this
one not enabled.

Clicking OK on the dialog stores these settings.
